1. Introduce topic
2. Demonstrate/walkthrough of steps
3. Summarize what you talked about

3-5 minutes


Petz Selective Breeding?? 

Petz is a series of single-player pet simulation games which began to be released in 1995, with the last edition, Petz 5, being released in 2002. In Petz, you can adopt, take care of and raise a virtual cat or dog. These games feature an intiuitive AI for the time which still holds up today which makes the game incredibly interactive and the pixelated petz realistic. For this reason, perhaps, there is still a wide community of users online experimenting with the game and playing with these petz, some of us using our coding knowledge to dig into the code. I could honestly go on for hours about everything in the Petz games that you can do, but for today I will only focus on one, primarily using Petz 4.

One mechanic which shows how complex the game can be is tricks--dogz and certain catz, those pocessing the 'trickster' gene, can learn a variety of tricks and the game actually does keep track of how you trained the pet and which trick. To begin with, there are a grand total of thirty-six known dog tricks, which are categorized into five separate categories; up, down, left, right and toy. Each dog can only learn five total tricks from each of our five cateogires--trying to teach a sixth will only cause confusion and frustration for both the pixel dog and you. Your main tool in beginning a training session is a treat, any treat wil do out of the five separate types but this is something you have to be careful of.  You must be considerate of which treat you use to train for each trick. Using a Chicken treat to train a dog for a down trick and then trying to get that same down trick with a Beef treat WILL not work! You have to remember to keep track of which treat is tied to which trick. Again, keeping track of this along with the program's code definitely helps to avoid confusion and fustration in what should be a fun activity!

For this example, we're going to pretend we have Pongo, an adult dalmatian. He has never been trained any tricks. Let's teach him possibly the simplest treat there is- sit. Grab the treat from the toy closet location and bring it to the room with you where you'd like to train your dog. Pick up a treat from the box and wave it under your dog-- sit is a 'down' trick, so you wave it 'down'. If it was a up trick, you'd wave it above the dog, a left trick you--- you get the idea. Pongo will focus on the treat and give you a down trick. It will rarely be the trick you want on your first try. Pongo might lie down instead--this is okay, just ignore it and let him get up and try the trick again-DO NOT DROP THE TREAT OR PET HIM. The dog won't 'learn' anything until you reward him but you also aren't punishing him for guessing wrong. Petz can become afraid of activities with too much negative feedback such as picking him up too roughly or spraying him with a spray bottle. Pongo understands we didn't want a lay down when you wave the treat, so he tries again and look --a sit! Promptly drop the treat in front of him and let him eat it. This is a positive feedback for the game, telling the dog that this was the desired trick. Pulling out the same kind of treat and trying again has a greater likelihood the second time around of sitting earlier. A couple of rounds of treats--and petting, that counts as well! After about three or four rounds of this treat-feedback, Pongo learns the trick!  

In conclusion, Petz is an old simulation game  from the 90 and early 00's but it can be incredibly complex. We talked about tricks and went into a basic introduction into the idea of training petz tricks. Of course, this is not the end-all, be-all and you can explore it on your own.